T-200/21

JUDGMENT OF THE GENERAL COURT (First Chamber)
6 September 2023 (*)

(Law governing the institutions – Protection of personal data – Regulation (EU) 2018/1725 – Rejection
of the complaint to the EDPS concerning the storage and processing of personal data by the SRB –
Refusal of the request for review – Right to erasure – Right to object – Right to restriction of
processing – Article 26 of the Staff Regulations – Principle of sound administration)
In Case T‑200/21,
JS, represented by L. Levi and A. Champetier, lawyers,
applicant,
v
European Data Protection Supervisor (EDPS), represented by U. Kallenberger and A. Pouliou,
acting as Agents,
defendant,
THE GENERAL COURT (First Chamber),
composed of D. Spielmann, President, V. Valančius (Rapporteur) and R. Mastroianni, Judges,
Registrar: V. Di Bucci,
having regard to the written part of the procedure,
having regard to the fact that no request for a hearing was submitted by the parties within three weeks
after service of notification of the close of the written part of the procedure, and having decided to rule
on the action without an oral part of the procedure, pursuant to Article 106(3) of the Rules of Procedure
of the General Court,
gives the following
Judgment
1

By his action, the applicant seeks, first, on the basis of Article 263 TFEU, annulment of the decision of
the European Data Protection Supervisor (EDPS) of 18 January 2021 rejecting his complaint (‘the first
contested decision’) and of the decision of the EDPS of 9 March 2021 refusing his request for review
of the first contested decision (‘the second contested decision’) (together, ‘the contested decisions’)
and, secondly, on the basis of Article 268 TFEU, compensation for the damage which he claims to have
suffered as a result of the contested decisions.
Background to the dispute and contested decisions

2

The applicant took up his duties, as a member of the temporary staff, at the Single Resolution Board
(SRB) on 1 November 2017. On 4 September 2019, he resigned with effect from 30 September 2019.
The applicant’s requests to the SRB

3

By an email of 29 September 2019, the applicant, citing Regulation (EU) 2018/1725 of the European
Parliament and of the Council of 23 October 2018 on the protection of natural persons with regard to
the processing of personal data by the Union institutions, bodies, offices and agencies and on the free
movement of such data, and repealing Regulation (EC) No 45/2001 and Decision No 1247/2002/EC
(OJ 2018 L 295, p. 39), requested from the SRB a copy of all his personal data and all data referring to
his person stored at the SRB.

4

By a supplementary email of the same date sent to the SRB’s Data Protection Officer (‘the DPO’), the
applicant requested the latter to inform him of the purposes of the two instances of access to his
personal data stored in the European Commission’s personnel management IT system, Sysper 2, on
12 June 2019, and to investigate whether those instances of access could have constituted a breach of
his personal data. He also requested that measures be taken to prevent any unauthorised access,
modification, processing or disclosure of his personal data stored at the SRB.

5

By an email of 17 February 2020 sent to the DPO, the applicant reiterated his request to the SRB ‘to
confirm [to him] whether or not personal (in part[ic]ular, HR-related) data concerning [him] [was]
being processed’, ‘to provide [to him] a copy of [his] personal data’ and ‘to restrict the processing of
[his] personal data’, while ‘object[ing to the] processing of [his] personal data’.

6

On 28 February 2020, the DPO provided the applicant with certain data concerning him, stating that,
‘following the Common Commission-level retention list for European Commission files
[(SEC(2012)713)] that SRB applies by analogy, and in view of the relevant articles 11, 26, 81 and 127
of the applicable Staff Regulations [of Officials of the European Union] and [Conditions of
Employment of Other Servants of the European Union], the SRB ha[d] the legal obligation to store
[his] personal file in accordance with the retention list’ and that his ‘personal file [wa]s now archived
and w[ould] be stored up to 8 years after the extinction of all [his] rights, and for at least 120 years after
[his] birth date’.

7

In response to that email, the applicant, by an email of 8 March 2020, requested the SRB to delete his
personal data processed by the latter and reiterated his request for restriction of the processing of his
personal data and for objection to the processing of such of his personal data which are not to be
deleted (‘the request for erasure’).

8

The request for erasure is worded as follows:
‘Thank you very much for your message and sending the copy of my personal (in particular, HRrelated) data stored by the SRB. Also thanks for the opportunity to request my personal data (e.g.
administrative certificates) from sysper[.] I would let you know in case any further of my personal data
was needed.
In exercise of my rights enshrined in Regulation [2018/1725], regarding my personal data sent by the
SRB below, I kindly request its deletion from SRB systems (by SRB HR and any other SRB data
controller) as no purpose for processing by the SRB looks necessary and justified to me.
For any of my personal data potentially retained …, I kindly request to be informed about the purpose
of that retention of my personal data by the SRB.
For any of my personal data which are not [to] be deleted, if such longer retention was indeed
necessary and just, I request the restriction of and object [to] its processing by the SRB. My request for
restriction of and objection against any processing by the SRB applies in particular to those of my
personal data whose accuracy I have repeatedly disputed by my appeals and complaints under
Art. 90(2) EU Staff Regs (e.g. my personal data contained in the documents which the SRB has called
[“]appraisal reports”).’

9

By emails of 20 March and 17 and 20 April 2020, the applicant reiterated his ‘request for erasure’,
withdrawing his consent to the processing of those data by the SRB.

10

The DPO replied to those emails by an email of 30 April 2020, refusing the request for erasure.

11

In that email, first, the DPO confirmed to the applicant that the SRB had a legal obligation to store his
personal file in accordance with the Common Commission-level retention list for European
Commission files (SEC(2012)713) and under Articles 11, 26, 81 and 127 of the Staff Regulations of
Officials of the European Union (‘the Staff Regulations’) and the Conditions of Employment of Other
Servants of the European Union, with that legal obligation precluding, under Article 19(3)(b) of
Regulation 2018/1725, the application of the right to erasure provided for in Article 19(1) of that
regulation.

12

In the same email, secondly, the DPO stated that Article 10(5) of the Staff Regulations required the
SRB to store those data in a single personal file, with the SRB being required to transfer that personal
file to any EU institution as a potential new employer, and some of the data in the personal file were
also kept in the context of a further and/or future financial obligation for its staff or their family
members (that is to say, survivors’ or orphans’ pensions). Those considerations justify the application
by analogy of the retention period for personal data, provided for in the Common Commission-level
retention list for European Commission files (SEC(2012)713), namely 120 years after the date of birth
of the official or other servant. The DPO inferred from this, also on the basis of Articles 11, 81 and 127
of the Staff Regulations, that the SRB was not allowed to delete data from the applicant’s personal file.

13

Thirdly, the DPO stated that that officer’s legal obligation to retain personal data in the applicant’s
personal file precluded, pursuant to Article 5(1)(b) of Regulation 2018/1725, the application of the
right to object provided for in Article 23(1) of Regulation 2018/1725.

14

Fourthly, as regards the request for restriction of processing of his personal data, pursuant to
Article 20(1)(a) and (b) of Regulation 2018/1725, the DPO invited the applicant to specify the data
whose accuracy he disputed.
Procedure before the EDPS and contested decisions

15

On 20 March 2020, the applicant lodged a complaint with the EDPS against the SRB, pursuant to
Article 63(1) of Regulation 2018/1725 (‘the complaint’).

16

In the complaint, first of all, the applicant stated that, following his resignation, he had asked the SRB
to erase his personal data, in particular the data referring to his name contained in the ‘appraisal
reports’, since:
‘(a)

th[ose] personal data [we]re no longer necessary in relation to the purposes for which they [had
been] collected or otherwise processed;

(b)

[he had] withdrawn [all] consent on which the processing is based according to point (d) of
Article 5(1), or […] Article 10(2) [of Regulation 2018/1725], and where there [wa]s no other
legal ground for the processing;

(c)

[he had] objected to the processing pursuant to Article 23(1) [of Regulation 2018/1725] and
there [we]re no overriding legitimate grounds for the processing;

(d)

[his] personal data ha[d], in [his] view, been unlawfully processed;

(e)

[his] personal data ha[d] to be erased for compliance with a legal obligation to which the
controller [of the personal data] is subject.’

17

In the complaint, the applicant also stated that ‘the [SRB] on the contrary claim[ed] to be allowed to
store all [his] personal data “for at least 120 years after [his] birth”’, the ‘processing and storage’ for
such a duration ‘in [his] view, infring[ing] [his] rights entitled by [Regulation 2018/1725], in particular
[his] rights in accordance with Art. 19 [of Regulation 2018/1725, namely the] Right to erasure (“right
to be forgotten”) and Article 20 [of Regulation [2018/1725, namely the] Right to restriction of
processing and Article 23 [of Regulation 2018/1725, namely the] Right to object’.

18

In the complaint, the applicant then asked the EDPS ‘to instruct the SRB to comply with [his] requests
in exercise of [his] rights (in particular the requested erasure of [his] personal data [concerned]) without

undue delay’.
19

By emails of 3 and 8 April 2020, the applicant submitted additional observations to the EDPS, alleging
that the infringements of his rights were aggravated by certain elements, and in particular by
unauthorised disclosures of his personal data.

20

By an email of 8 April 2020, however, the applicant asked the EDPS not to pursue his allegations at
that stage.

21

By letter of 14 April 2020, the EDPS invited the SRB to submit its observations on the applicant’s
allegations, attaching the complaint and its annexes.

22

On 17 April 2020, the DPO provided preliminary remarks on the allegations at issue, and on 25 May
2020, the SRB replied to the EDPS’s letter of 14 April 2020.

23

On 29 May 2020, the EDPS invited the applicant to submit observations on the SRB’s reply, and the
applicant did so on 31 July 2020.

24

By letter of 6 August 2020, the EDPS invited the SRB to submit its observations on the applicant’s
observations of 31 July 2020, which the SRB did on 17 September 2020.

25

On 8 October 2020, the EDPS invited the applicant to submit his observations on the SRB’s reply of
17 September 2020, which the applicant did on 4 November 2020.

26

On 18 January 2021, the EDPS rejected the applicant’s complaint by the first contested decision.

27

First, that decision concludes, in essence, that, as regards the right to erasure of the applicant’s
personal data, provided for in Article 19 of Regulation 2018/1725, read in the light of Article 26 of the
Staff Regulations, the SRB was under a legal obligation, within the meaning of Article 19(3)(b) of
Regulation 2018/1725, to keep the content of the applicant’s personal file. The applicant consequently
had no right to obtain from the SRB, as controller of the personal data, the erasure of personal data
concerning him, under Article 19(1) of Regulation 2018/1725.

28

Secondly, as regards the right to object to the processing of personal data, provided for in Article 23(1)
of Regulation 2018/1725, the EDPS recalled that, under Article 5(1)(b) of Regulation 2018/1725,
processing of those data was lawful if it was necessary for compliance with a legal obligation to which
the controller of the personal data was subject. Since that was indeed the case here, according to the
EDPS, the applicant had no right to object, under Article 23(1) of Regulation 2018/1725, to the
processing of his personal data.

29

Thirdly, as regards the applicant’s request for restriction of the processing of his personal data, based
on Article 20(1) of Regulation 2018/1725, the EDPS also considered that it should be refused. First of
all, the EDPS rejected the applicant’s argument based on the assumption that his personal data held by
the SRB were incomplete or inaccurate. He then noted that the processing was lawful within the
meaning of Article 5(1)(b) of Regulation 2018/1725, since it was necessary for compliance with a legal
obligation to which the SRB was subject pursuant to Article 26 of the Staff Regulations. Lastly, he
recalled that the applicant had no right to object under Article 23 of Regulation 2018/1725, as
previously established. The EDPS concluded therefrom that the applicant had no ground, in terms of
Article 20(1) of that regulation, to obtain from the SRB a restriction of the processing of his personal
data.

30

In conclusion, the EDPS rejected the applicant’s complaint, stating as follows:
‘The attention of the SRB is drawn to the Common Commission-level retention list of the European
Commission files in its second updated version (SEC(2019)900) as well as the EDPS Guidelines [of
10 October 2008] concerning the processing operations in the field of staff recruitment. Whilst not
applicable in the case of the [applicant], who has been working for the SRB until September 2019,
these recommend a retention period for personal data stored in personal files under Article 26 of the

Staff Regulations of ten years as of the termination of employment or as of the last pension payment as
reasonable.’
31

On 17 February 2021, the applicant, pursuant to Article 18(1) of the Decision of the EDPS of 15 May
2020 adopting the Rules of Procedure of the EDPS (OJ 2020 L 204, p. 49) (‘the EDPS Rules of
Procedure’), submitted to the EDPS a request for review of the first contested decision (‘the request for
review’).

32

In the request for review, which included, in annex, several documents relating to the personal-data
protection policies of various EU agencies, the applicant argued as follows:
‘[The first contested] decision did not [either] assess the necessity for the SRB to store and process [the
applicant’s] personal data beyond the […] duration [recommended in the EDPS guidelines] i.e.
10 years as of the termination of employment [footnote: “The other hypothesis of the last pension
payment is not relevant here as [the applicant] has no pension entitlements”] or even a shorter period as
requested nor the lawfulness of the SRB’s claimed purposes.
Indeed, if according to Article 26 [of the Staff Regulations] …, [the applicant] would not be entitled to
ask for erasure, to object or to have a right to the restriction of processing [of his personal data], it still
remains instrumental for him to know and understand when timewise these rights can be exercised.
Indeed, none of the other EU agencies … under Regulation [2018/1725] seem to store their former
staffs’ personal data, in particular appraisal reports, as long as the SRB claims to be “legally obliged”
to store [the applicant’s]. In that respect the maximum retention period for former staffs’ personal data
seems to be 10 years … Indeed, not even the [Common Commission-level retention list for European
Commission files] applies a 120 years [retention] period for any of the personal data of staff exiting
without pension entitlements.
Obviously, the lifelong retention period was originally intended by the EU institutions for the purpose
of retired staffs’ pension entitlements, which is however not applicable in the present case, as [the
applicant] left the EU service without such entitlements. Furthermore, the contested data whose erasure
[the applicant] has specifically requested (data relating to his person, which the SRB names “appraisal
reports”) are not necessary and [are] irrelevant for financial obligations in the sense of the Staff and
Financial Regulations and can thus be erased before the standard 10 years period.
Contrary, the SRB applies a retention period for [the applicant’s] entire personal file of 120 years after
his birth date.
We argue that this duration is not only in breach of the [common retention list of 2012] but not
necessary in order for the SRB to comply with its obligations.
Likewise, it prevents [the applicant] from exercising his fundamental rights as enshrined by Regulation
[2018/1725] and the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights.
… [In the present case] a duration of 120 years … deprives from any effectiveness the fundamental
rights of [the applicant to the protection of his personal data].
In that regard, it is respectfully submitted that [the EDPS] should have assessed also the proportionality
of the duration of the SRB’s intended retention period and purposes in order to assess the
validity/ground of [the applicant’s] request and complaint – which [he] did not.
…’

33

On 27 February 2021, the SRB was invited by the EDPS to submit its observations on the request for
review, which the SRB did on 5 March 2021, reiterating its observations which it had sent to the EDPS
on 17 September 2020 for the purposes of submitting that the request for review should be refused.

34

On 9 March 2021, the EDPS refused the applicant’s request for review by the second contested
decision.

35

The second contested decision is worded as follows:
‘We have carefully analysed the request for review and have concluded that you have not provided any
new factual evidence or legal arguments, which would justify a review of the [first contested d]ecision.
We take note that, in the request for review, you also raise the issue as to the exact time when the
[applicant] will be entitled to exercise his right to erasure, right to object and right to restriction of
processing [of his personal data], since “it still remains instrumental for him to know and understand
when time-wise these rights can be exercised”.
Similarly, we note that you contest the 120 years retention period applied by the SRB to the
[applicant]’s personal data contained in his personal file.
However, please note that the subject matter of the complaint investigated under case 2020-0342 was
limited to the [applicant]’s request for erasure of his personal data submitted to the SRB on 8 March
2020.
Future exercise of the right to erasure and exercise of other rights, such as the right to object and right
to restriction of the processing [of personal data], as well as any arguments relating to the lawfulness of
the 120 years retention period applied by SRB to personal files have, therefore, not been subject to the
EDPS investigation in the context of the present complaint case.
Consequently, these elements cannot be addressed within the framework of the review procedure.
Should the [applicant] wish to contest those, he may lodge a new complaint to the EDPS in this
regard.’
Forms of order sought

36

37

The applicant claims that the Court should:
–

annul the first contested decision and, so far as necessary, the second contested decision;

–

order the EDPS to pay him the sum of EUR 20 000 in respect of the damage suffered;

–

order the EDPS to pay the costs.

The EDPS contends that the Court should:
–

dismiss the action as unfounded;

–

order the applicant to pay the costs.

Law
38

By the present action, the applicant seeks the annulment of the contested decisions and compensation
for the damage allegedly suffered.
The new evidence submitted by the parties

39

In the first place, the applicant submitted to the Court, by document lodged at the Court Registry on
31 August 2021, three new items of evidence.

40

According to the EDPS, that new evidence must be dismissed as in part inadmissible and in part
irrelevant and unfounded.

41

In the present case, first of all, the applicant submitted an exchange of emails between himself, the
Human Resources Directorate of the Commission and the SRB.

42

Irrespective of the question of their admissibility, those items must be dismissed.

43

Indeed, they are not relevant for the purposes of ruling in the present case, since their content relates
not to a refusal to erase or to allow objection to, or restriction of, the processing of the applicant’s
personal data, but to a right of access to certain data, that right being unrelated to the subject matter of
the present dispute.

44

Next, the applicant submitted a decision of the EDPS of 3 March 2020 in a case involving the
European Court of Auditors.

45

Irrespective of the question of its admissibility, that new item of evidence must be dismissed.

46

Indeed, that new evidence is in no way relevant for the purposes of ruling in the present dispute, in that
a decision of the EDPS in another case cannot be relied upon as against him in the present case.

47

Lastly, the applicant submitted an exchange of emails with the European Central Bank (ECB) Data
Protection Officer relating to the ECB’s practice as regards the periods for the retention and processing
of personal data of ECB staff.

48

Irrespective of the question of their admissibility, those items must be dismissed.

49

The practice of other EU institutions, agencies or bodies, as regards the periods for the retention and
processing of personal data, cannot be relevant in the present case and, in any event, can in no way be
relied upon as against the EDPS in the present case.

50

The new items of evidence submitted by the applicant must, therefore, be dismissed.

51

In the second place, by document lodged at the Court Registry on 5 October 2021, the EDPS
submitted a new item of evidence, namely the complaint lodged by the applicant on 7 August 2021
regarding the SRB’s retention period for personal data, which expressly refers to the complaint in the
present case.

52

According to the applicant, that new item of evidence must be dismissed as irrelevant.

53

However, that item of evidence is relevant in the present case, since that other complaint concerns the
period for the retention and processing of personal data by the SRB.

54

Moreover, its lateness is justified by the date on which the defence was lodged, namely 8 July 2021,
which was before the date on which that other complaint was lodged, in accordance with Article 85(3)
of the Rules of Procedure of the General Court.

55

That item of evidence must, therefore, be admitted.
The claims for annulment

56

The applicant seeks annulment of the first contested decision, by which the complaint was rejected,
and, in so far as necessary, annulment of the second contested decision, by which the request for review
of the first contested decision was refused.
The claim directed against the first contested decision

57

In support of his claim for annulment, the applicant relies on a single plea in law, alleging
infringements of Article 4(1) and Articles 5, 19, 20 and 23 of Regulation 2018/1725, as well as
infringement of the principles of necessity and proportionality and of Articles 7, 8 and 41 and
Article 52(1) of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union (‘the Charter’).

58

The applicant submits that the EDPS failed to assess whether it was necessary for the SRB to provide
for a minimum period of 120 years for the storage and processing of the personal data at issue, in
particular as regards the appraisal reports, in order to comply with its obligations under Article 26 of
the Staff Regulations.

59

To that end, the applicant recalls that, pursuant to Article 4(1)(e) of Regulation 2018/1725, the
retention period for personal data must be no longer than is necessary for the purposes for which those
data are processed and that, in the first contested decision, the EDPS drew the SRB’s attention to the
EDPS Guidelines and the Common Commission-level retention list of the European Commission files
in its second updated version (SEC(2019)900); attention was drawn to those documents
notwithstanding that, according to the EDPS, those texts were not applicable in the present case, those
guidelines having provided for a maximum duration of 10 years and the EDPS having constantly stated
beforehand that a duration of 120 years was excessive.

60

The applicant complains that the EDPS failed to check either the necessity or the purpose of such a
retention period and relies in that regard on the practice of other EU agencies and institutions, as well
as the EDPS’s own opinions.

61

As the EDPS himself stated, the lifelong retention period was originally intended by the EU
institutions for the purpose of their retired officials’ pension entitlements, which is however not
applicable in the present case, as the applicant, a former temporary agent, left the EU service without
such pension entitlements and had no spouse or children.

62

In the applicant’s view, the contested data relating to his name, which the SRB claims to be ‘appraisal
reports’, are neither necessary nor relevant to the financial obligations within the meaning of the Staff
Regulations and Regulation (EU, Euratom) 2018/1046 of the European Parliament and of the Council
of 18 July 2018 on the financial rules applicable to the general budget of the Union, amending
Regulations (EU) No 1296/2013, (EU) No 1301/2013, (EU) No 1303/2013, (EU) No 1304/2013, (EU)
No 1309/2013, (EU) No 1316/2013, (EU) No 223/2014, (EU) No 283/2014, and Decision
No 541/2014/EU and repealing Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012 (OJ 2018 L 193, p. 1), whereas
the SRB applies a retention period for the applicant’s entire personal file of at least 120 years after his
date of birth.

63

A retention period, as regards personal data, of at least 120 years after the applicant’s birth is, in itself
or in any event in the present case, not necessary in order for the SRB to comply with its obligations
deriving from Article 26 of the Staff Regulations.

64

The applicant submits that such a retention period is also disproportionate, as previously constantly
stated by the EDPS himself, in that it introduces an undue limitation and unlawful breach of the
fundamental rights enshrined in Articles 7 and 8 of the Charter in the light of Article 52(1) thereof.

65

Such a retention period also deprives of any effectiveness the applicant’s fundamental rights to
erasure, to the restriction of the processing of his personal data and to object, as provided by
Regulation 2018/1725.

66

Thus, the fact that the EDPS does not assess the lawfulness of the 120-year retention period for
personal data constitutes a failure to fulfil his obligations as regards the effectiveness of the applicant’s
fundamental rights enshrined in the Charter and in Regulation 2018/1725 and as regards his duty to act
diligently enshrined in Article 41 of the Charter.

67

The EDPS disputes those arguments.

68

In the first place, it is for the Court to ascertain whether the EDPS wrongly rejected the applicant’s
complaint, in breach of the right to erasure, enshrined in Article 19 of Regulation 2018/1725, the right
to object, enshrined in Article 23 of that regulation, and the right to the restriction of the processing of
personal data, enshrined in Article 20 of the regulation.

69

It should be noted that Article 4 of Regulation 2018/1725, entitled ‘Principles relating to processing of
personal data’, provides in paragraph (1)(a) and (b) thereof, inter alia, that personal data must be
processed lawfully, fairly and in a transparent manner in relation to the data subject and that they must
be collected for specified, explicit and legitimate purposes and not further processed in a manner that is
incompatible with those purposes.

70

Article 5 of Regulation 2018/1725, entitled ‘Lawfulness of processing’, provides in paragraph (1)(b)
thereof that processing is to be lawful, in particular if it is necessary for compliance with a legal
obligation to which the controller is subject.

71

Article 19(1) of Regulation 2018/1725 provides for the right to obtain from the controller of the
personal data the erasure of those data. Article 19(3)(b) of that regulation contains an exception to that
principle where the processing of the personal data is necessary for compliance with a legal obligation
to which the data controller is subject. In other words, the erasure of personal data may not be obtained
if the processing of those data, and thus their retention, is necessary for compliance with a legal
obligation to which the controller of those data is subject.

72

Article 20 of Regulation 2018/1725 provides that the data subject must have the right to obtain from
the controller of personal data restriction of processing, in particular where the accuracy of the data is
contested, where the processing is unlawful or where the controller no longer needs the personal data
for the purposes of the processing, but they are required by the data subject for the establishment,
exercise or defence of legal claims.

73

Article 23(1) of Regulation 2018/1725 allows the data subject to object, on grounds relating to his or
her particular situation, at any time to processing of personal data concerning him or her which is based
on point (a) of Article 5(1), that is, where processing is necessary for the performance of a task carried
out in the public interest or in the exercise of official authority vested in the EU institution or body. In
that case, the controller of the personal data must no longer process those data unless the controller
demonstrates compelling legitimate grounds for the processing which override the interests, rights and
freedoms of the data subject or for the establishment, exercise or defence of legal claims.

74

In the present case, the SRB’s legal obligation justifying the refusal of the requests seeking erasure and
to object to processing arises from Article 26 of the Staff Regulations, which requires the SRB to keep
all documents concerning the administrative status of the official or servant concerned and all reports
relating to his or her ability, efficiency and conduct. Article 26 also provides that an official must have
the right, even after leaving the service, to acquaint himself or herself with all the documents in his or
her file and to take copies of them.

75

In so far as the applicant alleges infringement of Articles 19, 20 and 23 of Regulation 2018/1725, it
must be found that, in the light of the complaint brought before him, the EDPS was right to refuse the
applicant’s requests.

76

First, as regards the right to erasure of personal data, it follows from reading Article 19(3)(b) of
Regulation 2018/1725 in conjunction with Article 26 of the Staff Regulations, that the SRB could
consider itself legally obliged to keep the applicant’s file and not to grant his request for erasure.

77

As the EDPS stated in reply to a question from the Court, the retention of those data meets the need to
establish pension rights or to determine rights of a surviving spouse or orphans and must, therefore,
cover a sufficient period for the staff member (or his or her beneficiaries) to have exhausted all
channels of appeal after termination of his or her service within the meaning of Article 47 of the Staff
Regulations.

78

Furthermore, even if the applicant is not concerned by pension rights, the SRB’s refusal is consistent
with the purpose of Article 26 of the Staff Regulations, which is, inter alia, to enable any official, even
after leaving the service, to acquaint himself or herself with all the documents in his or her file and to
take copies of them. It may indeed be noted that that access to his file was requested by the applicant
and was granted to him on 28 February 2020. Similarly, as is apparent, in particular, from the first
contested decision, the applicant brought actions against the SRB before the Court in May 2020, which,
as at the date of the first contested decision, were still pending.

79

Accordingly, without prejudice to the question of how long the personal file may be retained, it follows
from the applicable provisions that, as at the date of the first contested decision, the EDPS was right to
uphold the SRB’s refusal of the applicant’s request seeking the erasure of his personal data present in
his file.

80

Secondly, as regards the applicant’s request that the processing of his personal data be restricted, apart
from the fact that he does not appear to have specified what specific form of restriction he wished, such
a restriction must meet certain conditions laid down in Article 20 of Regulation 2018/1725, which the
applicant has not established were satisfied in the present case. In particular, he has not established how
the data in his file are inaccurate or incomplete, or that the first contested decision is erroneous in that
regard.

81

Thirdly, as regards the request seeking to object to the processing of the applicant’s personal data,
within the meaning of Article 23(1) of Regulation 2018/1725, the EDPS correctly notes that the SRB
relied on the legal obligation deriving from Article 5(1)(b) of Regulation 2018/1725, according to
which the processing of personal data is lawful if it is necessary for compliance with a legal obligation
to which the controller is subject, which is the case here. The applicant fails to substantiate his
challenge further in that regard.

82

Accordingly, the applicant’s argument concerning a lack of purpose or necessity in order to refuse his
right to erasure or his right to object to the processing of his personal data contained in his personal file
and retained by the SRB on that basis must be rejected. Consequently, the first contested decision, by
which the EDPS rejected the applicant’s complaint in that regard, is not vitiated by unlawfulness.

83

In the second place, the applicant submits before the Court that the EDPS erred in failing to assess the
proportionality of the retention period for his personal data.

84

In that regard, it should be recalled that, pursuant to Article 57(1)(e) of Regulation 2018/1725, relating
to the tasks of the EDPS, the latter is to ‘handle complaints lodged by a data subject, or by a body,
organisation or association … and investigate, to the extent appropriate, the subject matter of the
complaint and inform the complainant of the progress and the outcome of the investigation within a
reasonable period, in particular if further investigation or coordination with another supervisory
authority is necessary’.

85

However, in the present case, the subject matter of the complaint was limited to the request seeking
erasure, the exercise of the right to object, and the exercise of the right to restrict the processing of the
applicant’s personal data.

86

It is true that, in the complaint, the applicant referred to the 120-year retention period for personal data
that was applied by the SRB.

87

Nonetheless, the fact remains that the applicant’s objective was to obtain the erasure of his personal
data, in particular his appraisal reports, as is apparent from the material in the file relating, in particular,
to the procedure before the SRB.

88

It is also apparent from the file that the applicant did not, in the complaint, develop any legal argument
concerning the examination of the retention period for personal data in the light of the principle of
proportionality.

89

In the complaint, the applicant argued that the 120-year retention period for personal data that was
applied by the SRB infringed his rights enshrined in Articles 19, 20 and 23 of Regulation 2018/1725,
without in any way substantiating his arguments, even though those provisions do not relate to the
retention period for personal data.

90

Furthermore, the proportionality of the retention period for personal data that was applied by the SRB
was not advanced by the applicant as such, but in the context of invoking a breach of his individual
rights as a data subject under Articles 19, 20 and 23 of Regulation 2018/1725.

91

Therefore, the EDPS did not make an error of assessment in finding that the subject matter of the
applicant’s complaint was limited to the request seeking erasure, the right to object, and the right to
restrict the processing of the applicant’s personal data.

92

It follows that, in the present case, the EDPS did not err in law in not examining the future exercise of
the right to erasure, of the right to object or of the right to restrict the processing of personal data, or

any arguments relating to the lawfulness of the 120-year retention period for personal data that was
applied by the SRB to personal files.
93

In addition, as the EDPS indeed rightly noted in the second contested decision, if the applicant wished
to contest those elements, he could lodge a new complaint with the EDPS, in order to enable the issue
of the proportionality of the retention period for personal data that was applied by the SRB to be
examined in relation to the purposes for which the data were processed, in compliance with the
adversarial principle and the rights of defence of all the parties to the dispute.

94

Moreover, it is clear from the documents in the file that the applicant lodged such a request with the
EDPS on 7 August 2021, concerning the retention period for personal data that was applied by the
SRB, which expressly refers to the complaint in the present case.

95

Consequently, without prejudice to the merits of that request, the objections alleging infringement of
Article 4(1)(e) of Regulation 2018/1725, in relation to the retention period for the applicant’s personal
data, and of Article 8 and Article 52(1) of the Charter, relating to the protection of personal data and
the principle of proportionality, which in essence accord with the arguments previously examined, must
also be rejected.

96

Similarly, it must be found that the alleged infringement of Article 7 of the Charter, relating to the
protection of private and family life, has not been substantiated in any way before the Court and must
be rejected.

97

In the third place, the applicant alleges infringement of the right to good administration, guaranteed by
Article 41 of the Charter, in the context of the claim for annulment and submits in that regard that the
EDPS failed to act diligently in the conduct of his investigation of the complaint.

98

It must be borne in mind that the duty to act diligently which is inherent in the principle of sound
administration and applies generally to the actions of the EU administration in its relations with the
public requires that that administration act with care and caution (judgment of 4 April 2017,
Ombudsman v Staelen, C‑337/15 P, EU:C:2017:256, paragraph 34; see also, to that effect, judgment of
16 December 2008, Masdar (UK) v Commission, C‑47/07 P, EU:C:2008:726, paragraphs 92 and 93).

99

In the present case, in so far as the applicant complains of the time taken to deal with his requests, that
argument must be rejected. The applicant lodged his complaint on 20 March 2020, was invited, as was
the SRB, to submit observations and he himself requested an extension of the time limit for responding
on 14 June 2020. Accordingly, in the light of the material in the file, the first contested decision cannot
be regarded as having been adopted within an unreasonable period of time.

100

In so far as the applicant maintains that the EDPS ought to have examined the complaint in a more
‘open-minded manner’ and that he ought to have taken into consideration all the elements of the file,
that argument must be rejected.

101

In the circumstances of the present case and in the light of the complaint before the EDPS, the
principle of sound administration did not require him to exercise his powers of investigation. Moreover,
as the EDPS states, this would not have had any impact on the conclusion that the applicant was not
entitled to erasure of his personal data held by the SRB as at the date of the first contested decision,
namely 18 January 2021, since the applicant’s personal data had been stored only since the date of his
resignation, namely 30 September 2019.

102

In addition, in the first contested decision, the EDPS drew the SRB’s attention to the Common
Commission-level retention list of the European Commission files in its second updated version
(SEC(2019)900), as well as the EDPS Guidelines concerning the processing operations in the field of
staff recruitment, even though those texts were not applicable to the applicant’s case, who worked for
the SRB until September 2019. The EDPS thus observed that they recommended a retention period for
personal data stored in personal files under Article 26 of the Staff Regulations of 10 years as from the
termination of employment or as from the last pension payment and it is apparent from its answer to
the Court’s question, sent on 10 March 2022, that the SRB took that statement into account.

103

In that context, the EDPS did not infringe the right to good administration.

104

It follows that the claim for annulment directed against the first contested decision must be dismissed.
The claim against the second contested decision

105

By the second contested decision, the EDPS refused the request for review of the first contested
decision, submitted by the applicant on the basis of Article 18(1) of the EDPS Rules of Procedure. In
essence, first, he found that the applicant had not provided any new evidence or arguments which
would justify a review of the first contested decision. Secondly, he found, in the subsequent paragraphs
of his decision, that the future exercise of the right to erasure and of other rights, such as the right to
object and right to restriction of the processing of personal data, as well as any arguments relating to
the lawfulness of the 120-year retention period applied by SRB to personal files, had not been subject
to the EDPS investigation in the context of the complaint case and that those elements could not,
therefore, be addressed within the framework of the review procedure.

106

It must be borne in mind that, under Article 18 of the EDPS Rules of Procedure, the ‘EDPS shall
review its decision where the complainant or institution advances new factual evidence or legal
arguments’, which must logically relate to the subject matter of the complaint and to the content of the
decision relating to it.

107

In the present case, in the complaint of 20 March 2020, the wording of which is reproduced in
paragraphs 16 to 18 above, the applicant requested the erasure of his personal data. He also asserted his
right to object and his right to the restriction of the processing of those data.

108

Those requests were refused by the first contested decision, from which it is apparent that all those
requests were indeed dealt with by the EDPS. It is not apparent from the applicant’s request for review
that, as regards his request seeking erasure, to object and for restriction of the processing of his
personal data, he advanced new evidence which was not taken into account by the EDPS.

109

It follows that the EDPS was right to find, in the context of the request for review, that no new
evidence had been produced by the applicant as regards his requests already examined in the context of
the first contested decision.

110

In addition, in the context of the challenge to the retention period for his personal data, the applicant
produced, inter alia, several documents relating to the personal-data protection policies of various EU
agencies, arguing that it was instrumental for him to know and understand when time-wise his rights
could be exercised. The applicant submitted that the EDPS should have assessed the proportionality of
the duration of the SRB’s retention period for personal data and the purposes thereof.

111

However, it must be stated that, in that respect, the subject matter of the request for review differed
from that of the complaint and from that of the first contested decision, with the result that the evidence
produced in the request for review could not be accepted, pursuant to Article 18 of the EDPS Rules of
Procedure, for the purposes of a review by the EDPS of the first contested decision.

112

The EDPS was, therefore, fully entitled to find that the future exercise of the rights relied upon by the
applicant, as well as any arguments relating to the lawfulness of the 120-year retention period for
personal data that was applied by the SRB, had not been subject of the complaint of 8 March 2020
before the SRB and that of 20 March 2020 before the EDPS, that they had not, therefore, been subject
to an EDPS investigation and that they could not be addressed within the framework of the review
procedure.

113

The applicant’s argument that his complaint related not only to erasure, but also to objection and to the
restriction of the processing of personal data and that the EDPS wrongly failed to take into account that
objection and that request for restriction of the processing of personal data, in refusing his request for
review, must be rejected. The EDPS took into account all the applicant’s requests. In addition, that
argument is based upon a misreading of the second contested decision, since it was in the context of his
analysis relating to the request for review concerning the future exercise of the rights relied upon and

the proportionality of the duration that the EDPS referred to the request for erasure submitted on
8 March 2020 to the SRB.
114

Consequently, the EDPS was fully entitled to find that those arguments could not be dealt with in the
context of the review procedure. The arguments based upon infringement of the principle of good
administration must be rejected for the same reasons as those set out in paragraphs 101 to 103 above.

115 Accordingly, the claim for annulment directed against the second contested decision and, therefore, the
claim for annulment in its entirety must be dismissed.
The claim for compensation
116

In support of his claim for compensation, the applicant submits that all the conditions for liability on
the part of the EDPS are met in the present case.

117

First of all, the applicant submits that Article 8 of the Charter, the duty to act diligently and the
principle of good administration, including the principle that procedures must be conducted within a
reasonable time, enshrined in Article 41 of the Charter, and Regulation 2018/1725 confer rights on
individuals.

118

Secondly, in the present case, there is a sufficiently serious breach by the EDPS of the duty to act
diligently and of the principle of good administration, because, by failing to act with all the requisite
care and caution, the EDPS gravely and manifestly disregarded the limits on his discretion in the
exercise of his power to investigate complaints and requests for revision.

119

Next, the applicant submits that the infringement of the principle of good administration, in particular
of the reasonable time principle, allowed the SRB to repeat ongoing infringements of his personal data,
thereby causing him damage, assessed ex aequo et bono at EUR 20 000.

120

Lastly, the applicant submits that the damage sustained is a sufficiently direct consequence of the
seriously unlawful conduct of the EDPS, which is the determinant cause of the damage sustained.

121

The EDPS contends that the claim for compensation should be dismissed, since none of the conditions
for him to incur liability are met.

122

In that regard, it must be borne in mind that in order for the European Union to incur non-contractual
liability under the second paragraph of Article 340 TFEU and for the right to compensation to be
enforceable, a number of conditions must be satisfied: the conduct alleged against the institutions must
be unlawful, actual damage must have been suffered and there must be a causal link between that
conduct and the damage complained of. That liability cannot be regarded as having been incurred
without satisfaction of all the conditions to which the duty to make good any damage, as defined in the
second paragraph of Article 340 TFEU, is thus subject (see judgment of 3 July 2018, Transtec v
Commission, T‑616/15, EU:T:2018:399, paragraph 164 and the case-law cited).

123

In the present case, it is apparent from the Court’s findings that no unlawfulness vitiating the first
contested decision or the second contested decision has been established.

124

Accordingly, the applicant’s claim for compensation must be dismissed and, therefore, the action must
be dismissed in its entirety.
Costs

125

Under Article 134(1) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs
if they have been applied for in the successful party’s pleadings.

126

Since the applicant has been unsuccessful, he must be ordered to bear his own costs and to pay those
incurred by the EDPS, in accordance with the form of order sought by the EDPS.

On those grounds,
THE GENERAL COURT (First Chamber)
hereby:
1.

Dismisses the action;

2.

Orders JS to pay the costs.

Spielmann

Valančius

Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on 6 September 2023.
[Signatures]

*

Language of the case: English.

Mastroianni

