T-557/20

JUDGMENT OF THE GENERAL COURT (Eighth Chamber, Extended Composition)
26 April 2023 (*)

(Protection of personal data – Procedure for granting compensation to shareholders and creditors
following the resolution of a bank – Decision of the EDPS in which it found that the SRB failed to
fulfil its obligations concerning the processing of personal data – Article 15(1)(d) of Regulation (EU)
2018/1725 – Concept of personal data – Article 3(1) of Regulation 2018/1725 – Right of access to the
file)
In Case T‑557/20,
Single Resolution Board (SRB), represented by H. Ehlers, M. Fernández Rupérez, A. Lapresta Bienz,
acting as Agents, and by H.‑G. Kamann, M. Braun, F. Louis, and L. Hesse, lawyers,
applicant,
v
European Data Protection Supervisor (EDPS), represented by P. Candellier, X. Lareo and
T. Zerdick, acting as Agents,
defendant,
THE GENERAL COURT (Eighth Chamber, Extended Composition),
composed of A. Kornezov, President, G. De Baere (Rapporteur), D. Petrlík, K. Kecsmár and
S. Kingston, Judges,
Registrar: I. Kurme, Administrator,
having regard to the written part of the procedure,
further to the hearing on 1 December 2022,
gives the following
Judgment
1

By its action based on Article 263 TFEU, the Single Resolution Board (SRB) seeks, first, annulment
of the revised decision of the European Data Protection Supervisor (EDPS) of 24 November 2020
adopted following the SRB’s request for review of the decision of the EDPS of 24 June 2020
concerning five complaints submitted by several complainants (Cases 2019-947, 2019-998, 2019-999,
2019-1000 and 2019-1122) (‘the revised decision’) and, second, a declaration that the decision of the
EDPS of 24 June 2020 (‘the original decision’) is illegal.
Background to the dispute

2

On 7 June 2017, the SRB, in its executive session, adopted Decision SRB/EES/2017/08 concerning a
resolution scheme in respect of Banco Popular Español, SA (‘the resolution scheme’) on the basis of
Regulation (EU) No 806/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 July 2014
establishing uniform rules and a uniform procedure for the resolution of credit institutions and certain

investment firms in the framework of a Single Resolution Mechanism and a Single Resolution Fund
and amending Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010 (OJ 2014 L 225, p. 1).
3

On the same day, the European Commission adopted Decision (EU) 2017/1246 endorsing the
resolution scheme (OJ 2017 L 178, p. 15).

4

In the resolution scheme, the SRB, considering that the conditions laid down by Article 18(1) of
Regulation No 806/2014 were satisfied, decided to place Banco Popular Español (‘Banco Popular’)
under resolution. The SRB decided to write down and convert Banco Popular’s capital instruments
pursuant to Article 21 of Regulation No 806/2014 and to apply the sale of business tool under
Article 24 of Regulation No 806/2014 by transferring the shares to a purchaser.

5

Following the resolution of Banco Popular, on 14 June 2018, Deloitte sent to the SRB the valuation of
difference in treatment, provided for in Article 20(16) to (18) of Regulation No 806/2014, carried out
in order to determine whether the shareholders and creditors would have received better treatment if
Banco Popular had entered into normal insolvency proceedings (‘Valuation 3’).

6

On 6 August 2018, the SRB published on its website its Notice of 2 August 2018 regarding its
preliminary decision on whether compensation needs to be granted to the shareholders and creditors in
respect of which the resolution actions concerning Banco Popular have been effected and the launching
of the right to be heard process (SRB/EES/2018/132) (‘the preliminary decision’), and a nonconfidential version of Valuation 3. On 7 August 2018, an announcement with regard to the SRB
Notice was published in the Official Journal of the European Union (OJ 2018 C 277 I, p. 1).

7

In the preliminary decision, the SRB stated that, in order for it to be able to take its final decision on
whether the shareholders and creditors affected by the resolution of Banco Popular should be granted
compensation in accordance with Article 76(1)(e) of Regulation No 806/2014, it was inviting the
affected shareholders and creditors to express their interest in exercising their right to be heard pursuant
to Article 41(2)(a) of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union (‘the Charter’).
The right to be heard process

8

The SRB indicated in the preliminary decision that the right to be heard process would take place in
two phases. In the first phase (‘the registration phase’), the affected shareholders and creditors were
invited to express their interest in exercising their right to be heard, using an online registration form by
14 September 2018. The SRB then had to verify whether each party that had expressed an interest did
in fact qualify as an affected shareholder or creditor. In the second phase (‘the consultation phase’), the
affected shareholders and creditors whose status had been verified by the SRB were able to submit
their comments on the preliminary decision, to which Valuation 3 was annexed.

9

In the registration phase, the affected shareholders and creditors wishing to exercise their right to be
heard had to provide the SRB with supporting documentation proving that on the resolution date they
owned one or more of the capital instruments of Banco Popular that were written down or converted
and transferred to Banco Santander, SA in the context of the resolution. The supporting documentation
to be provided included proof of identity and proof of ownership of one of those capital instruments on
6 June 2017.

10

On 6 August 2018, the first day of the registration phase, the SRB also published, on the web page for
registering for the right to be heard process and on its website, a privacy statement concerning the
processing of personal data in the context of the right to be heard process (‘the privacy statement’).

11

On 16 October 2018, the SRB announced on its website that from 6 November 2018 the eligible
shareholders and creditors would be invited to submit their written comments on the preliminary
decision during the consultation phase.

12

On 6 November 2018, the SRB sent the eligible shareholders and creditors by email a unique personal
link to an online form (‘the form’). The form contained seven questions, with limited space for
answering, enabling the affected shareholders and creditors to submit comments on the preliminary
decision and on the non-confidential version of Valuation 3 by 26 November 2018.

13

The SRB examined the relevant comments from affected shareholders and creditors with regard to the
preliminary decision. It asked Deloitte, in its capacity as independent valuer, to assess the relevant
comments relating to Valuation 3, to provide it with a document containing its assessment, and to
examine whether Valuation 3 was still valid in the light of those comments.
The processing of data collected by the SRB in the context of the right to be heard process

14

The data collected during the registration phase, that is to say, proof of the participants’ identity and of
ownership of written down or converted and transferred capital instruments of Banco Popular, were
accessible to a limited number of SRB staff tasked with processing those data in order to determine the
participants’ eligibility.

15

Those data were not visible to the SRB staff tasked with processing the comments received in the
consultation phase, during which those staff members only received comments identified by reference
to an alphanumeric code allocated to each individual comment submitted using the form. The
alphanumeric code consisted of a 33-digit globally unique identifier randomly generated at the time the
responses to the form were received.

16

In a first step, the SRB automatically filtered 23 822 comments, each of which was allocated a unique
alphanumeric code, submitted by 2 855 participants in the process. Two algorithms identified 20 101
comments as being identical. The comment submitted first was considered the original comment and
was assessed in the analysis phase, and the identical comments received subsequently were identified
as duplicates.

17

In a second step, the analysis phase, the SRB examined the comments with the aim of ensuring
consistency in terms of assessing their relevance and of categorising (or grouping) them into defined
themes. The SRB identified similar but not identical comments based on the same sources available on
the Internet.

18

The SRB staff responsible for analysing the comments had access neither to the data collected in the
registration phase – with the result that the comments were separated from the personal information of
the persons who submitted them – nor to the data key or to information by which the identity of the
participants could be traced by reference to the unique alphanumeric code assigned to each individual
comment.

19

During that analysis phase, the SRB compared all the comments submitted and classified them
according to which question on the form they answered. The comments were then assessed in terms of
their relevance and divided into, on the one hand, those falling within the scope of the right to be heard
process because they could influence the preliminary decision or Valuation 3 and, on the other hand,
those falling outside that scope because they related to other aspects of the resolution of Banco Popular.

20

A comment falling within the scope of the process was then assigned to 1 of the 15 themes predefined
by the SRB. Depending on the theme to which they related, the comments were divided into those to be
examined by the SRB because they related to the preliminary decision and those to be examined by
Deloitte because they related to Valuation 3. Among the comments that had to be examined, the SRB
did not distinguish between comments that had been submitted on only one occasion and those that had
duplicates.

21

At the end of the analysis phase, the SRB had identified 3 730 individual comments classified
according to their relevance and theme.

22

In a third step, the review phase, the comments relating to the preliminary decision were handled by
the SRB while those relating to Valuation 3, that is to say, 1 104 comments, were transferred to Deloitte
on 17 June 2019, using a secure SRB-dedicated virtual data server. The SRB uploaded the files to be
shared with Deloitte to the virtual server and granted access to those files to a limited and controlled
number of Deloitte staff who were directly involved in the project.

23

The comments transferred to Deloitte were filtered, categorised and aggregated. Where the comments
were duplicates of earlier comments, only one version was transmitted to Deloitte. This meant that

individual comments that had been duplicated could not be distinguished within a single theme, and
Deloitte was unaware whether a comment had been made by one or more participants in the process.
24

The comments transferred to Deloitte were solely those that were received during the consultation
phase and that bore an alphanumeric code. On account of that code, only the SRB could link the
comments to the data received in the registration phase. The alphanumeric code was developed for
audit purposes to verify, and if necessary to demonstrate subsequently, that each comment had been
handled and duly considered. Deloitte had, and still has, no access to the database of data collected
during the registration phase.
The procedure before the EDPS

25

On 19, 26 and 28 October, and 5 December 2019, affected shareholders and creditors who had
responded to the form submitted five complaints to the EDPS (cases 2019-947, 2019-998, 2019-999,
2019-1000 and 2019-1122) (‘the five complaints’) under Regulation (EU) 2018/1725 of the European
Parliament and of the Council of 23 October 2018 on the protection of natural persons with regard to
the processing of personal data by the Union institutions, bodies, offices and agencies and on the free
movement of such data, and repealing Regulation (EC) No 45/2001 and Decision No 1247/2002/EC
(OJ 2018 L 295, p. 39).

26

Those five complainants (‘the complainants’) relied on the fact that the SRB had failed to inform them
that the data collected through the responses on the forms would be transmitted to third parties, namely
Deloitte and Banco Santander, in breach of the terms of the privacy statement. They claimed that, by
doing so, the SRB had infringed Article 15(1)(d) of Regulation 2018/1725, according to which, ‘where
personal data relating to a data subject are collected from the data subject, the controller shall, at the
time when personal data are obtained, provide the data subject with … information [concerning] the
recipients or categories of recipients of the personal data, if any’.

27

On 12 December 2019, the EDPS informed the SRB that he had received five complaints, and
requested it to submit comments.

28

On 24 June 2020, following a procedure in which the SRB provided various explanations at the
request of the EDPS and the complainants submitted observations, the EDPS adopted the original
decision. The EDPS found that the SRB had infringed Article 15 of Regulation 2018/1725 because it
had failed to inform the complainants, in its privacy statement, that their personal data might be
disclosed to Deloitte. As a result, he issued the SRB with a reprimand for that infringement, under
Article 58(2)(b) of Regulation 2018/1725.

29

On 22 July 2020, the SRB requested the EDPS to review the original decision under Article 18(1) of
the Decision of the EDPS of 15 May 2020 adopting the Rules of Procedure of the EDPS (OJ 2020
L 204, p. 49). The SRB provided, inter alia, a detailed description of the right to be heard process and
of how the comments submitted by the four identified complainants during the consultation phase had
been analysed. It argued that the information transmitted to Deloitte did not constitute personal data
within the meaning of Article 3(1) of Regulation 2018/1725.

30

On 5 August 2020, the EDPS informed the SRB that, in the light of new information provided, he had
decided to re-examine the original decision and would adopt a decision replacing it.

31

On 24 November 2020, following the review procedure, during which the complainants submitted
observations and the SRB provided additional information at the request of the EDPS, the latter
adopted the revised decision.

32

The EDPS decided to revise the original decision in the following terms:
‘1. The EDPS finds that the data the SRB shared with Deloitte were pseudonymous data, both because
the comments in [the consultation phase] were personal data and because the SRB shared the
alphanumeric code that allows linking the replies given in [the registration phase] with the ones given
in [the consultation phase] – notwithstanding the fact that the data provided by the participants to
identify themselves in [the registration phase] were not disclosed to Deloitte.

2. The EDPS finds that Deloitte was a recipient of the complainants’ personal data under Article 3(13)
of [Regulation 2018/1725]. The fact that Deloitte was not mentioned in SRB’s [privacy statement] as a
potential recipient of the personal data collected and processed by the SRB as the controller in the
context of the [right to be heard] process constitutes an infringement of the information obligations laid
down in Article 15(1)(d) [of Regulation 2018/1725].
3. In light of all the technical and organisational measures set up by the SRB to mitigate the risks for
the individuals’ right to data protection in the context of the [right to be heard] process, the EDPS
decides not to exercise any of his corrective powers laid down in Article 58(2) of [Regulation
2018/1725].
4. The EDPS nevertheless recommends the SRB to ensure that the data protection notice in future
[right to be heard] processes covers the processing of personal data in both the registration phase and
the consultation phase, and includes all potential recipients of the information collected, in order to
fully comply with the obligation to inform data subjects in accordance with Article 15 [of Regulation
2018/1725].’
Forms of order sought
33

34

The SRB claims, after modification of the form of order sought, that the General Court should:
–

annul the revised decision;

–

declare the original decision illegal;

–

order the EDPS to pay the costs.

The EDPS contends that the General Court should:
–

dismiss the action;

–

order the SRB to pay the costs.

Law
The second head of claim, requesting the General Court to ‘declare the original decision illegal’
35

In the present case, it is common ground between the parties that the revised decision repealed and
replaced the original decision.

36

The EDPS argues that, as a result, the head of claim concerning the original decision is inadmissible.

37

The SRB contends that it retains an interest in establishing the procedural irregularities that led to the
adoption of the original decision, namely infringements of its rights of defence and of its right of access
to the file, so that they do not recur in future procedures. It stated, in its reply to a measure of
organisation of procedure, that, by its second head of claim, it was not seeking the annulment of the
original decision, which had been repealed and replaced by the revised decision with ex tunc effect, but
rather a declaration of its illegality.

38

The Court must therefore hold that, by its second head of claim, the SRB seeks to obtain a declaratory
judgment and not the annulment of an act.

39

However, it is sufficient to note that, according to settled case-law, the Court, in the context of a
review of legality based on Article 263 TFEU, does not have jurisdiction to give declaratory judgments
(see judgments of 4 February 2009, Omya v Commission, T‑145/06, EU:T:2009:27, paragraph 23 and
the case-law cited, and of 13 September 2018, DenizBank v Council, T‑798/14, EU:T:2018:546,
paragraph 135 and the case-law cited).

40

It follows that the SRB’s second head of claim, requesting the Court to ‘declare the original decision
illegal’, must be rejected on the ground that the Court has no jurisdiction to hear and determine it.
Admissibility of the first head of claim, seeking annulment of the revised decision

41

The admissibility of actions is an absolute bar to proceeding that can be raised by the EU Courts of
their own motion at any time (see judgment of 16 March 2022, MEKH and FGSZ v ACER, T‑684/19
and T‑704/19, EU:T:2022:138, paragraph 29 and the case-law cited; see also, to that effect, judgment
of 24 March 1993, CIRFS and Others v Commission, C‑313/90, EU:C:1993:111, paragraph 23). In the
context of a measure of organisation of procedure, the General Court asked the parties, inter alia,
whether the revised decision constituted an act open to challenge under Article 263 TFEU.

42

In his reply to that question, the EDPS states that the fact that the revised decision contains its final
position and a finding of infringement is not sufficient for it to constitute a reviewable act. It is
necessary that that position brings about a change in the legal situation of the SRB. Since the EDPS did
not make use, in the revised decision, of his corrective powers provided for in Article 58 of Regulation
2018/1725, that decision can be considered not to produce legal effects for the purposes of being open
to review under Article 263 TFEU.

43

The SRB, in its reply to that question, argues that the revised decision has legal effects capable of
affecting its interests.

44

It follows from case-law that, under the fourth paragraph of Article 263 TFEU, a natural or legal
person may challenge only measures the legal effects of which are binding on, and capable of affecting
the interests of, that person by bringing about a distinct change in his or her legal position. Thus, it is in
principle those measures which definitively determine the position of an institution, body, office or
agency of the European Union upon the conclusion of an administrative procedure, and which are
intended to have legal effects capable of affecting the interests of the complainant, that constitute acts
open to challenge, and not intermediate measures whose purpose is to prepare for the final decision,
which do not have those effects (see judgments of 25 June 2020, SatCen v KF, C‑14/19 P,
EU:C:2020:492, paragraphs 69 and 70 and the case-law cited, and of 6 May 2021, and ABLV Bank and
Others v ECB, C‑551/19 P and C‑552/19 P, EU:C:2021:369, paragraph 39 and the case-law cited).

45

In order to determine whether the contested act produces such effects, it is necessary to examine the
substance of that act and to assess those effects on the basis of objective criteria, such as the content of
that act, taking into account, as appropriate, the context in which it was adopted and the powers of the
EU institution, body, office or agency which adopted the act (judgments of 22 April 2021, thyssenkrupp
Electrical Steel and thyssenkrupp Electrical Steel Ugo v Commission, C‑572/18 P, EU:C:2021:317,
paragraph 48 and the case-law cited; of 6 May 2021, ABLV Bank and Others v ECB, C‑551/19 P and
C‑552/19 P, EU:C:2021:369, paragraph 41 and the case-law cited; and of 6 October 2021, Tognoli and
Others v Parliament, C‑431/20 P, EU:C:2021:807, paragraph 34 and the case-law cited).

46

In the first place, the Court notes that the revised decision was adopted by the EDPS following a
request from the SRB for revision of the original decision. The revised decision, adopted following an
adversarial administrative procedure, repeals and replaces the original decision and constitutes a
decision definitively laying down the position of the EDPS on the five complaints.

47

Article 64(2) of Regulation 2018/1725, relating to the right to an effective judicial remedy, provides
that actions against decisions of the EDPS are to be brought before the Court of Justice of the European
Union.

48

In particular, Article 18 of the Rules of Procedure of the EDPS, on the basis of which the revised
decision was adopted, provides, inter alia, in paragraph 3 thereof:
‘Where following a request that it review its decision on a complaint, the EDPS issues a new, revised
decision, the EDPS shall inform the complainant and the institution concerned that they may challenge
this new decision before the Court of Justice of the European Union in accordance with Article 263
[TFEU].’

49

In that regard, the covering letter for the revised decision sent to the SRB contains the following
wording:
‘Please note that this Decision repeals and replaces the decision adopted on 24 June 2020. You may
bring an action for annulment against this Decision before the Court of Justice of the European Union,
within two months from the adoption of the present Decision and according to the conditions laid down
in Article 263 TFEU.’

50

In the second place, as regards the substance of the revised decision, the Court notes, first, that the
EDPS concluded that the SRB had infringed its obligation to provide information under Article 15(1)
(d) of Regulation 2018/1725 and, second, that he advised the SRB, in essence, to ensure that such an
infringement is not repeated in its privacy statements.

51

First, the Court finds that, pursuant to Article 65 of Regulation 2018/1725, such an infringement is
capable of rendering the SRB liable, as controller of the data concerned, where the other conditions laid
down in the Treaties are satisfied.

52

Second, pursuant to Article 66(1) of Regulation 2018/1725, when deciding whether to impose an
administrative fine on an EU institution or body and deciding on the amount of the administrative fine,
the EDPS is to give regard to, inter alia, any similar previous infringements by that institution or body.
Therefore, if the SRB were to fail to follow the EDPS recommendation to amend its privacy statements
in the future in right to be heard processes, a similar infringement of Article 15(1)(d) of Regulation
2018/1725 by the SRB could be found and a fine could be imposed.

53

It follows that the finding, in the revised decision, that the SRB infringed Article 15(1)(d) of
Regulation 2018/1725 produces binding legal effects, even though the EDPS stated that he was
waiving his right to exercise his corrective powers provided for in Article 58(2) of Regulation
2018/1725.

54

In the light of the foregoing, the revised decision is an EU act capable of affecting the interests of the
person to whom that act is addressed by bringing about a distinct change in his or her legal position. It
therefore constitutes an act open to challenge for the purpose of Article 263 TFEU.

55

Accordingly, it must be held that the first head of claim seeking annulment of the revised decision is
admissible.
Substance

56

In support of its action, the SRB relies on two pleas in law. The first alleges infringement of
Article 3(1) of Regulation 2018/1725 in so far as the information transmitted to Deloitte did not
constitute personal data. The second plea alleges infringement of the right to good administration
enshrined in Article 41 of the Charter.

57

By its first plea, the SRB argues that the EDPS infringed Article 3(1) of Regulation 2018/1725 by
finding, in the revised decision, that the information transmitted to Deloitte constituted the
complainants’ personal data.

58

Article 3(1) of Regulation 2018/1725 defines personal data as ‘any information relating to an
identified or identifiable natural person [and states that] an identifiable natural person is one who can
be identified, directly or indirectly, in particular by reference to an identifier such as a name, an
identification number, location data, an online identifier or to one or more factors specific to the
physical, physiological, genetic, mental, economic, cultural or social identity of that natural person’.

59

It is apparent from that definition that information constitutes personal data, in particular, if two
cumulative conditions are met, namely, first, that that information ‘relates’ to a natural person and,
second, that that person is ‘identified or identifiable’.
The condition laid down in Article 3(1) of Regulation 2018/1725 that the information is to ‘relate’ to a
natural person

60

The SRB argues that the comments received during the consultation phase and communicated to
Deloitte did not relate to specific persons within the meaning of Article 3(1) of Regulation 2018/1725.
It argues that the reasoning followed in the judgment of 20 December 2017, Nowak (C‑434/16,
EU:C:2017:994), does not apply to the complainants’ comments. It submits that the information
contained in the complainants’ comments was factual and legal information independent of the persons
or personal qualities of the complainants and unrelated to their private life. It maintains that the
purpose of the right to be heard process was to assess factual and legal arguments concerning the
preliminary decision and Valuation 3 from a large number of interested parties, whose personality and
identity were not relevant for the purposes of assessing their comments.

61

The EDPS argues that the content of the comments of the affected shareholders and creditors is
information ‘relating to’ them, given that their responses contained and reflected their personal view,
even if they relied on publicly available information. The responses on the form from the complainants
and the other participants constitute personal data, irrespective of whether they are the expression of an
original point of view or of a view shared with others and irrespective of whether the SRB regards
them as information independent of the specific privacy rights of the affected shareholders and
creditors.

62

The EDPS also contends that the comments constituted personal data by reason of their effect. The
assessment of those comments, the purpose of which was to verify the validity of Valuation 3 and the
legality of the preliminary decision, was liable to have an effect on the participants’ interests and rights
regarding financial compensation. Lastly, the EDPS argues that the purpose of collecting those
comments was to grant procedural rights to each party, in order to collect their individual viewpoints.

63

In the revised decision, the EDPS stated that the responses received during the consultation phase
constituted personal data of the complainants, as they contained their personal views and were thus
information relating to them, even if they relied on publicly available information to express their
views. It claimed that the fact that the complainants expressed similar, though not identical, views to
those of other participants did not mean that their responses did not reflect their own views.
Consequently, the EDPS maintained that the responses provided in the free text fields by the
complainants and other participants must all be considered personal data, whether those responses are
the expression of an original and unique view or a view shared with others or inspired by or taken from
publicly available information. It added that that conclusion was not contradicted by the judgment of
20 December 2017, Nowak (C‑434/16, EU:C:2017:994), where the Court of Justice did not make a
distinction between responses entirely elaborated by the respondents and responses taken from other
sources of knowledge.

64

The Court must examine whether the EDPS was entitled to conclude that the information transmitted
to Deloitte ‘related’ to a natural person within the meaning of Article 3(1) of Regulation 2018/1725.

65

As a preliminary point, it should be noted that, in the revised decision, the EDPS classified as personal
data all the comments made by the affected shareholders and creditors in the context of the consultation
phase and did not limit his assessment solely to the information transmitted to Deloitte.

66

In so far as the infringement of Article 15(1)(d) of Regulation 2018/1725 found in the revised decision
concerned only the fact that the SRB did not mention, in the privacy statement, that Deloitte was a
potential recipient of certain data, it is appropriate for the Court to limit its examination to whether the
information transmitted to Deloitte was personal data within the meaning of Article 3(1) of Regulation
2018/1725.

67

In that regard, Article 3(13) of Regulation 2018/1725 defines ‘recipient’ as ‘a natural or legal person,
public authority, agency or another body, to which the personal data are disclosed, whether a third party
or not’.

68

According to case-law, the use of the expression ‘any information’ in the definition of the concept of
‘personal data’, within Article 3(1) of Directive 2018/1725, reflects the aim of the EU legislature to
assign a wide scope to that concept, which is not restricted to information that is sensitive or private,
but potentially encompasses all kinds of information, not only objective but also subjective, in the form

of opinions and assessments, provided that it ‘relates’ to the data subject (see, by analogy, judgment of
20 December 2017, Nowak, C‑434/16, EU:C:2017:994, paragraph 34).
69

As regards the latter condition, the Court of Justice has held that it is satisfied where the information,
by reason of its content, purpose or effect, is linked to a particular person (see judgment of
20 December 2017, Nowak, C‑434/16, EU:C:2017:994, paragraph 35).

70

However, in the revised decision, the EDPS did not examine the content, the purpose or the effect of
the information transmitted to Deloitte.

71

It merely stated that the comments produced by the complainants during the consultation phase
reflected their opinions or views and concluded, on that basis alone, that they constituted information
relating to the complainants, which was sufficient to classify them as personal data.

72

At the hearing, the EDPS confirmed that, according to him, any personal opinion constituted personal
data. He also acknowledged that he had not examined the content of the comments submitted by the
complainants during the consultation phase.

73

Admittedly, it cannot be ruled out that personal views or opinions may constitute personal data.
However, it is apparent from paragraphs 34 and 35 of the judgment of 20 December 2017, Nowak
(C‑434/16, EU:C:2017:994), cited in paragraphs 68 and 69 above, that such a conclusion cannot be
based on a presumption such as the one described in paragraphs 71 and 72 above, but must be based on
the examination of whether, by its content, purpose or effect, a view is linked to a particular person.

74

It follows that, since the EDPS did not carry out such an examination, he could not conclude that the
information transmitted to Deloitte constituted information ‘relating’ to a natural person within the
meaning of Article 3(1) of Regulation 2018/1725.

75

The General Court will move on to examine the EDPS’s assessment of whether the information
transmitted to Deloitte related to an ‘identified or identifiable’ natural person.
The condition laid down in Article 3(1) of Regulation 2018/1725 that the information is to relate to an
‘identified or identifiable’ natural person

76

The SRB argues that, contrary to what the EDPS found, sharing the alphanumeric code with Deloitte
did not make the data ‘pseudonymous’. They remained anonymous, because the SRB did not share
with Deloitte the information allowing re-identification of the author of those comments.

77

The SRB submits that the data are rendered anonymous for a third party, even if the information
allowing re-identification is not irrevocably eliminated and resides with the original processor, as long
as the form in which the data are shared with that third party does not allow re-identification anymore
or where re-identification is not reasonably likely. The SRB argues that, contrary to what the EDPS
found in the revised decision, Regulation 2018/1725 and the case-law of the Court of Justice require an
assessment of the risk of re-identification.

78

Specifically, the SRB claims that the conditions laid down by the case-law of the Court of Justice
concerning whether there is a risk of re-identification where the information that could identify the data
subject is not all held by one person, but by more than one party, are not satisfied in the present case.
First, the alphanumeric code assigned to the individual comments does not enable Deloitte to reidentify the data subjects who submitted comments. The additional information referred to in
Article 3(6) of Regulation 2018/1725 corresponds to the decoding database, to which only the SRB has
access. Second, with respect to the test relating to a reasonable likelihood that the information would be
combined, Deloitte did not have and still does not have any lawful means of gaining access to the
additional, identifying information.

79

The EDPS contends that the fact that Deloitte did not have access to the information held by the SRB
that would enable re-identification does not mean that the ‘pseudonymised’ data transmitted to Deloitte
became anonymous data. It is not necessary to determine whether the persons who provided the
information transmitted to Deloitte were re-identifiable by Deloitte or whether re-identification by

Deloitte was reasonably likely. ‘Pseudonymised’ data remain so even when transmitted to a third party
that does not have additional information.
80

The EDPS argues that the use of the term ‘indirectly’ in Article 3(1) of Regulation 2018/1725 means
that, for information to be classified as personal data, it is not necessary that that information alone
allows the data subject to be identified. Furthermore, as regards the means reasonably likely to be used
both by the controller and by any other person, there is no requirement that all the information enabling
the identification of the data subject must be in the hands of one person.

81

In the revised decision, the EDPS found that the information transmitted to Deloitte was
pseudonymised data. In that regard, he stated that the difference between pseudonymous and
anonymous data is that, in the case of anonymous data, there was no ‘additional information’ that could
be used to attribute the data to a specific data subject, whereas, in the case of pseudonymous data, there
is such additional information. Therefore, in order to assess whether data are anonymous or
pseudonymous, it is necessary to consider whether there is any ‘additional information’ that can be
used to attribute the data to specific data subjects.

82

He noted that the SRB had transmitted to Deloitte not only certain comments from the affected
shareholders and creditors, but also the corresponding alphanumeric code, and that Deloitte had not had
access to the responses given during the registration phase. He stated that, as the SRB had explained, ‘it
was impossible for Deloitte to trace the identity of any party using this code by reference to the hard
data provided by the eligible parties as part of the registration phase (which was at all times retained by
the SRB)’. However, the EDPS found that the data provided during the registration phase together with
the unique identifier, namely the alphanumeric code attributed to each eligible participant, constituted a
perfect example of ‘additional information’ within the meaning of Article 3(6) of Regulation
2018/1725, because it could be used by the SRB to attribute the data to a specific data subject.

83

The EDPS explained that Regulation 2018/1725 did not distinguish between those who kept
pseudonymous data and those who held additional information and that the fact that they were different
entities did not make pseudonymous data anonymous. It added that the fact that Deloitte was not in a
position to attribute the comments singlehandedly to the registration-phase data did not alter the fact
that the data it had received were ‘pseudonymised’. According to the EDPS, the data the SRB had
shared with Deloitte were pseudonymous data, both because the comments received during the
consultation phase were personal data and because the SRB shared the alphanumeric code that allowed
the responses given in the registration phase to be linked with the ones given in the consultation
phase – notwithstanding the fact that the data provided by the participants to identify themselves in the
registration phase had not been disclosed to Deloitte. It concluded that the information transmitted to
Deloitte constituted ‘pseudonymised’ data and, therefore, personal data within the meaning of
Article 3(1) of Regulation 2018/1725.

84

As a preliminary point, the Court finds that, having regard to the mechanisms put in place by the SRB
concerning the processing of data collected in the context of the right to be heard process, described in
paragraphs 14 to 24 above, the information transmitted to Deloitte did not concern ‘identified’ persons.

85

The Court must therefore examine whether the EDPS was entitled to take the view that the information
transmitted to Deloitte related to an ‘identifiable’ natural person within the meaning of Article 3(1) of
Regulation 2018/1725.

86

According to that provision, an ‘identifiable natural person’ is one who can be identified, directly or
indirectly.

87

Recital 16 of Regulation 2018/1725 reads as follows:
‘… Personal data which have undergone pseudonymisation, which could be attributed to a natural
person by the use of additional information, should be considered to be information on an identifiable
natural person. To determine whether a natural person is identifiable, account should be taken of all the
means reasonably likely to be used, such as singling out, either by the controller or by another person,
to identify the natural person directly or indirectly. To ascertain whether means are reasonably likely to
be used to identify the natural person, account should be taken of all objective factors, such as the costs

of and the amount of time required for identification, taking into consideration the available technology
at the time of the processing and technological developments. …’
88

The General Court notes that, in the judgment of 19 October 2016, Breyer (C‑582/14,
EU:C:2016:779), the Court of Justice interpreted the concept of personal data within the meaning of
Article 2(a) of Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 October 1995
on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free
movement of such data (OJ 1995 L 281, p. 31), which contains a provision which is equivalent to
Article 3(1) of Regulation 2018/1725.

89

That case raised the question whether a dynamic internet protocol address (‘IP address’) constituted
personal data vis-à-vis the online media services provider which had registered it. The Court of Justice
held that it was necessary to ascertain whether that IP address could be treated as information relating
to an ‘identifiable natural person’, taking into account, first, that it did not, in itself, give that service
provider the possibility to identify the user who had consulted that website and, second, the fact that
the necessary additional information which, if combined with the IP address, would enable the user to
be identified, was held by the internet service provider.

90

In so far as recital 16 of Regulation 2018/1725 refers to the means likely reasonably to be used by both
the controller and by ‘any other person’, its wording suggests that, for information to be treated as
‘personal data’ within the meaning of Article 3(1) of Regulation 2018/1725, it is not required that all
the information enabling the identification of the data subject must be in the hands of one person (see,
by analogy, judgment of 19 October 2016, Breyer, C‑582/14, EU:C:2016:779, paragraph 43).

91

However, the Court added that the fact that the additional information necessary to identify the user of
a website was held not by the online media services provider, but by that user’s internet service
provider did not appear to be such as to exclude that dynamic IP addresses registered by the online
media services provider constituted personal data for that provider (judgment of 19 October 2016,
Breyer, C‑582/14, EU:C:2016:779, paragraph 44).

92

The Court of Justice nevertheless held that it must be determined whether the possibility to combine a
dynamic IP address with the additional information held by the internet service provider constituted a
means likely reasonably to be used to identify the data subject (judgment of 19 October 2016, Breyer,
C‑582/14, EU:C:2016:779, paragraph 45).

93

The Court of Justice stated that that would not have been the case if the identification of the data
subject had been prohibited by law or had been practically impossible on account of the fact that it
would have required a disproportionate effort in terms of time, cost and man-power, so that the risk of
identification would have appeared in reality to be insignificant (judgment of 19 October 2016, Breyer,
C‑582/14, EU:C:2016:779, paragraph 46).

94

In the present case, it is not disputed, first, that the alphanumeric code appearing on the information
transmitted to Deloitte did not in itself allow the authors of the comments to be identified and, second,
that Deloitte did not have access to the identification data received during the registration phase that
would have allowed the participants to be linked to their comments by virtue of the alphanumeric code.

95

The EDPS stated in the revised decision and confirmed at the hearing that the additional information
necessary to identify the authors of the comments consisted of the alphanumeric code and the
identification database.

96

It is true that, as the EDPS maintains, in the light of paragraph 43 of the judgment of 19 October 2016,
Breyer (C‑582/14, EU:C:2016:779), cited in paragraph 90 above, the fact that the additional
information necessary to identify the authors of the comments received during the consultation phase
was held not by Deloitte, but by the SRB, does not appear such as to exclude a priori that the
information transmitted to Deloitte constituted, for Deloitte, personal data.

97

However, it is also apparent from the judgment of 19 October 2016, Breyer (C‑582/14,
EU:C:2016:779), that, in order to determine whether the information transmitted to Deloitte constituted

personal data, it is necessary to put oneself in Deloitte’s position in order to determine whether the
information transmitted to it relates to ‘identifiable persons’.
98

The Court notes, first, that the infringement of Article 15(1)(d) of Regulation 2018/1725 found by the
EDPS in the revised decision concerned the transfer by the SRB of certain comments to Deloitte and
not merely the fact that the SRB held those comments.

99

Second, Deloitte’s situation can be compared to that of the online media services provider referred to
in the judgment of 19 October 2016, Breyer (C‑582/14, EU:C:2016:779), given that it held information,
namely the comments relating to Valuation 3, which did not constitute information relating to an
‘identified natural person’, in so far as the alphanumeric code appearing on each response did not make
it possible directly to reveal the identity of the natural person who filled in the form. The SRB’s
situation can also be compared to that of the internet service provider in that case, in so far as it is
common ground that the SRB alone held additional information enabling the affected shareholders and
creditors who responded on the form to be identified, namely the alphanumeric code and the
identification database.

100

Therefore, pursuant to paragraph 44 of the judgment of 19 October 2016, Breyer (C‑582/14,
EU:C:2016:779), cited in paragraph 91 above, it was for the EDPS to examine whether the comments
transmitted to Deloitte constituted personal data for Deloitte.

101

Thus, the EDPS is incorrect to maintain that it was not necessary to ascertain whether the authors of
the information transmitted to Deloitte were re-identifiable by Deloitte or whether such reidentification was reasonably possible.

102

It must be stated that, in the revised decision, the EDPS concluded that the fact that the SRB held
additional information enabling the authors of the comments to be re-identified was sufficient to
conclude that the information transmitted to Deloitte was personal data, while acknowledging that the
identification data received during the registration phase had not been communicated to Deloitte.

103

Accordingly, it is apparent from the revised decision that the EDPS merely examined whether it was
possible to re-identify the authors of the comments from the SRB’s perspective and not from Deloitte’s.

104

It is apparent from paragraph 45 of the judgment of 19 October 2016, Breyer (C‑582/14,
EU:C:2016:779), cited in paragraph 92 above, that it was for the EDPS to determine whether the
possibility of combining the information that had been transmitted to Deloitte with the additional
information held by the SRB constituted a means likely reasonably to be used by Deloitte to identify
the authors of the comments.

105

Therefore, since the EDPS did not investigate whether Deloitte had legal means available to it which
could in practice enable it to access the additional information necessary to re-identify the authors of
the comments, the EDPS could not conclude that the information transmitted to Deloitte constituted
information relating to an ‘identifiable natural person’ within the meaning of Article 3(1) of Regulation
2018/1725.

106

It follows from all of the foregoing that the first plea in law must be upheld and, accordingly, the
revised decision must be annulled, without it being necessary to examine the second plea in law.
Costs

107

Under Article 134(1) of the Rules of Procedure of the General Court, the unsuccessful party is to be
ordered to pay the costs if they have been applied for in the successful party’s pleadings.

108

Since the EDPS has essentially been unsuccessful, he must be ordered to pay the costs, in accordance
with the form of order sought by the SRB.

On those grounds,

THE GENERAL COURT (Eighth Chamber, Extended Composition)
hereby:
1.

Annuls the revised decision of the European Data Protection Supervisor (EDPS) of
24 November 2020 adopted following the request from the Single Resolution Board (SRB)
for review of the decision of the EDPS of 24 June 2020 concerning five complaints
submitted by several complainants (Cases 2019-947, 2019-998, 2019-999, 2019-1000 and
2019-1122);

2.

Dismisses the action as to the remainder;

3.

Orders the EDPS to pay the costs.

Kornezov

De Baere

Kecsmár

Petrlík
Kingston

Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on 26 April 2023.
E. Coulon

Registrar
*

Language of the case: English.

M. van der Woude

President

